#separator:tab
#html:false
#deck:food-science
#notetype:Basic
#columns:Front	Back	Tags

What does it mean to "bloom" tomato paste?	Cooking it directly in fat over medium heat for 1-2 minutes before adding liquid. Drives off water, concentrates sugars, and triggers Maillard browning. Raw paste tastes sharp and tinny; bloomed paste tastes deep and savory.	food-science flavor technique
Why does blooming tomato paste work?	Tomato paste is mostly water. Cooking it in fat drives off moisture and concentrates the solids. Heat also triggers Maillard reactions between amino acids and sugars, producing new flavor compounds that weren't there before.	food-science flavor maillard
How does blooming tomato paste connect to blooming spices?	Same principle: fat-soluble aroma compounds in spices (and in tomato paste) need heat and fat to release and develop. Water suppresses this. Cook in fat first, add liquid after.	food-science flavor technique
What is flavor stacking?	Building layers of flavor at different stages of cooking by adding ingredients at the moment they contribute most. Aromatics early (caramelized), herbs late (fresh), acid at the end (brightness). Each addition does a different job.	food-science flavor technique
Why does the order of adding ingredients matter in flavor stacking?	Heat transforms flavor differently at each stage. Long heat caramelizes and deepens. Short heat preserves volatile top notes. Acid added early mellows; acid added late stays bright. Order controls what each ingredient contributes.	food-science flavor technique
How does flavor stacking connect to blooming?	Blooming is flavor stacking applied to a single ingredient — tomato paste or spice gets its own dedicated high-heat fat stage before the rest of the dish catches up. It's sequencing within a step, not just between steps.	food-science flavor technique
What is emulsification?	The process of combining two liquids that normally don't mix, like oil and water, into a stable suspension. Requires an emulsifier — a molecule with one water-loving end and one fat-loving end — to hold them together.	food-science emulsification chemistry
What makes an emulsifier work?	Its molecule is amphiphilic: one end is hydrophilic (binds water), the other is hydrophobic (binds fat). It sits at the interface between the two liquids and prevents them from separating. Lecithin in egg yolk is a classic example.	food-science emulsification chemistry
What are common emulsifiers in cooking?	Egg yolk (lecithin), mustard (mucilage), honey, and dairy proteins. Each one stabilizes oil-in-water or water-in-oil emulsions differently. Mayo is oil-in-water; butter is water-in-oil.	food-science emulsification examples
How does emulsification connect to flavor?	Emulsions coat the tongue evenly, which affects mouthfeel and how flavor compounds are delivered. Fat-soluble flavors distribute better in an emulsion than in a sauce that has broken. A broken vinaigrette tastes sharper and less integrated.	food-science emulsification flavor
What is the Maillard reaction?	A chemical reaction between amino acids and reducing sugars that occurs above roughly 140C. Produces hundreds of flavor and aroma compounds along with brown color. Responsible for the flavor of seared meat, toasted bread, roasted coffee.	food-science maillard chemistry
How is the Maillard reaction different from caramelization?	Maillard requires both amino acids and sugars; caramelization is just sugar breaking down under heat. Maillard happens in meat, bread, and coffee. Pure caramelization happens when you cook sugar alone. Both produce browning but different flavor profiles.	food-science maillard caramelization
What is Koji?	Aspergillus oryzae, a mold cultivated on grains or legumes. Produces enzymes (amylases, proteases, lipases) that break down starches, proteins, and fats. The biological engine behind miso, soy sauce, sake, amazake, and many fermented foods.	food-science koji biology fermentation
What enzymes does Koji produce and what do they do?	Amylases break starch into sugars. Proteases break proteins into amino acids and peptides (umami). Lipases break fats into fatty acids (aroma). Together they transform a raw substrate into something complex, savory, and shelf-stable.	food-science koji biology enzymes
How does Koji create umami?	Protease enzymes cleave proteins into free glutamates and other amino acids. Free glutamate is the primary driver of umami taste. This is why miso, soy sauce, and aged koji-fermented meats taste deeply savory — the protein has been enzymatically digested into its building blocks.	food-science koji umami flavor
What is the difference between Koji fermentation and bacterial fermentation?	Koji is a mold (fungus), not a bacterium. It works aerobically on solid substrates (grain, meat, vegetables) by secreting enzymes externally. Bacterial fermentation (lacto, acetic) works anaerobically in liquid. Koji transforms texture and flavor through enzymatic hydrolysis; bacteria transform through acid production.	food-science koji fermentation biology
What is amazake?	A sweet, low- or no-alcohol drink made by fermenting cooked rice with Koji. Amylase enzymes convert starch to glucose, producing natural sweetness with no added sugar. Traditional Japanese, consumed warm. Sometimes called "drinkable IV" in Japan for its glucose and amino acid content.	food-science koji fermentation
How does Koji connect to flavor stacking?	Koji pre-digests proteins and starches before cooking, front-loading umami and sweetness into the ingredient. When you then apply heat (Maillard), you have more free amino acids and sugars available to react. Koji fermentation and Maillard browning are flavor stacking across time, not just across cooking stages.	food-science koji maillard flavor
What is a Koji cure or Koji board?	Applying Koji rice or Koji spores directly to meat or fish and holding it refrigerated for 24-72 hours. Proteases tenderize the surface and generate free glutamates. Results in faster Maillard browning and deeper savory flavor when cooked.	food-science koji technique meat
