#separator:tab
#html:false
#deck:perception-neuroscience
#notetype:Basic
#columns:Front	Back	Tags

What is the Ebbinghaus illusion?	Two circles of identical size, each surrounded by a ring of other circles — one ring larger, one smaller. The center circle surrounded by large circles looks smaller; surrounded by small circles, looks bigger. They are the same size.	perception illusions ebbinghaus
What does cross-cultural research show about the Ebbinghaus illusion?	People from non-carpentered environments (small villages, minimal grid architecture, less technology exposure) are significantly less susceptible — they see the center circles as the same size. The illusion requires something to be installed first.	perception illusions ebbinghaus culture
What does the Ebbinghaus cross-cultural finding imply about perception?	Perception is not neutral. The brain runs shortcuts shaped by environment. Getting fooled isn't a flaw — it's a trained heuristic misfiring. You can't see the shaping from inside it.	perception illusions ebbinghaus meta
What is a "carpentered environment"?	A built environment dominated by right angles, grids, and linear perspective — modern cities, offices, rectangular rooms. Exposure trains the brain to use surrounding context to infer object size and depth.	perception culture environment
How does growing up in a carpentered environment affect optical illusion susceptibility?	It increases susceptibility to size-context illusions (Ebbinghaus, Müller-Lyer) because the brain over-applies spatial shortcuts that are normally useful for navigating linear architecture.	perception culture environment
What is the Müller-Lyer illusion?	Two lines of equal length, one with inward-pointing arrowheads, one with outward-pointing. The outward one looks longer. Also shows reduced effect in non-carpentered cultures — the arrows invoke depth-perspective shortcuts.	perception illusions
What is the phantom limb illusion?	After amputation, many people feel sensations (often pain) in the missing limb. The brain's body map persists even when the body part is gone — the map generates experience, not the limb itself.	perception illusions body-map
What is the mirror box therapy for phantom limb pain?	A mirror creates a visual reflection of the intact hand in place of the missing one. The brain accepts this as the missing limb, allowing the patient to "move" it and relieve pain. Vision overrides proprioception.	perception illusions body-map therapy
What is the Laurel/Yanny illusion?	An audio clip that some people hear as "Laurel" and others as "Yanny." The signal contains both — which one you hear depends on which frequency range your auditory system emphasizes. Neither group is wrong.	perception illusions audio
What is Visual Snow Syndrome (VSS)?	A neurological condition where people see persistent static overlaid on the entire visual field — like TV snow, always present, in light and dark. Usually accompanied by afterimages, light sensitivity, and floaters.	vss perception neuroscience
What is the proposed neural basis of Visual Snow Syndrome?	Hyperexcitability of the visual cortex (V1/V2) — neurons fire at higher baseline rates, letting through noise that most brains filter. Some models invoke a failure of predictive suppression of expected background activity.	vss neuroscience basal-firing
What does VSS reveal about normal visual processing?	That the brain actively suppresses low-level neural noise before it reaches awareness. Most people never see the static because it gets filtered out. VSS is what the unfiltered signal looks like.	vss perception neuroscience meta
What is the basal firing rate of a neuron?	The rate of action potentials a neuron fires in the absence of a specific stimulus — the background hum of neural activity. Not zero: thermal noise and spontaneous neurotransmitter release keep neurons active at baseline.	neuroscience basal-firing
Why do neurons fire without stimulus?	Thermal noise causes random membrane depolarization; spontaneous neurotransmitter release happens stochastically; intrinsic ion channel fluctuations add variability. Some baseline activity is physically unavoidable.	neuroscience basal-firing signal-noise
How does the brain normally suppress neural noise?	Inhibitory interneurons dampen background activity. Predictive coding subtracts the expected baseline — only deviations (surprises) pass upward. What reaches consciousness is signal, not noise.	neuroscience signal-noise predictive-coding
What is predictive coding?	A theory of brain function: the brain generates top-down predictions of expected sensory input and passes only prediction errors (surprises) upward. Perception is mostly the prediction, updated at the edges by incoming data.	neuroscience predictive-coding perception
What does it mean that the brain "constructs" reality?	The brain doesn't passively record the world — it generates a model and uses sensory data only to correct it. Perception is a controlled hallucination, anchored to reality by error signals.	neuroscience perception meta
What is frontotemporal dementia (FTD)?	A group of brain disorders from progressive degeneration of the frontal and temporal lobes — regions governing personality, behavior, language, and executive function. Distinct from Alzheimer's; often earlier onset.	neuroscience ftd dementia
What paradox has been observed in some FTD patients?	Some develop new artistic or musical abilities as the disease progresses — "acquired savant syndrome." As frontal inhibition degrades, previously suppressed creative outputs emerge.	neuroscience ftd creativity
What does artistic emergence in FTD suggest about the healthy frontal lobes?	That they actively suppress certain spontaneous outputs. Remove the inhibition and hidden capacities appear. Creativity may not be absent in most people — it may be inhibited.	neuroscience ftd creativity meta
What is the Alzheimer's regression pattern and what might it reveal?	As Alzheimer's strips away constructed layers of self — memory, social identity, executive control — patients sometimes become more childlike or emotionally raw. One reading: not just loss, but exposure of something underneath the built self.	neuroscience alzheimers dementia meta
